# Shells

Shell abilities apply a special status effect on their target known as a _<dfn id = "term-shell">Shell</dfn>._  A Shell is a pool of temporary HP that has a fixed elemental type, including colorless.  When a character has a Shell applied to them, they will take double damage from all magical attacks.  In addition, when determining the elemental modifier to the damage they take or to their status effect modifier, you should take the target's elemental type to be the element of the Shell.  No character with the exception of some Antagonists may have more than one Shell of a given elemental type active at a time, and no player character may ever have more Shell than their base Health.  Enemies also begin battle with their maximum Shell already applied.  An enemy's maximum Shell is determined by the starting Shell they have in combat, and they cannot receive a Shell higher than this of any elemental type.

When a character's Shell is reduced to zero, they are referred to as _<dfn id = "term-shellbroken">Shellbroken</dfn>._  When a character's Shell is first broken by an attack, subtract the amount of damage the attack did to the character's Shell from the total final damage of the attack, modifiers included.  If the resulting number is greater than the character's remaining HP, the character is downed.  If the resulting number is less than the character's remaining HP, they do not take any additional damage.  Damage dealt in this way is referred to as _<dfn id = "term-overflow-damage">overflow damage</dfn>._
