# Combat

In Last Odyssey, when players engage in violence against one or more NPCs that are capable of significant violence against them, this is referred to as _combat._  When combat begins, the theater of the mind is supplanted by a more restrictive theater of battle that the characters cannot exit until they either flee the fight, defeat their opponents, or are defeated by their opponents.  The role of the theater of battle is to create a simplified representation of the actual terrain on which the characters are fighting, and thereby keep the inherent chaos in a violent encounter intelligible for all of its participants.  This has a few effects.  In Last Odyssey, combat is meant to be tactical.  Reducing the number of variables players must keep track of makes it easier to strategize, and also reduces the amount of time each player has to spend thinking about what to do on their turn.  Also, Last Odyssey, although not always cheerful or uplifting, is supposed to feel heroic.  More visceral violence also makes it harder to maintain the fiction that player characters aren't mass murderers or amoral mercenaries.  By keeping things abstract, Last Odyssey also softens the impact of individual acts of violence, which also makes those acts of violence that really matter all the more impactful.

Combat is over when either side is downed, surrenders, or flees.  In Last Odyssey, combat begins at the moment in the story when violence breaks out, and when the violence in question is a struggle between two opposing sides.  A lot of this depends on player intention.  An attack by bandits or an attempt by players to slay a dragon are perfect examples of when battle is appropriate, whereas a bar fight might be better handled by a skill challenge or simply by the narrative.  A masterful GM will know when to surprise players, when to give them an out, and when and how to foreshadow when combat might be approaching so that players are adequately prepared and when it's better to catch them by surprise.  Combat is when player characters most strongly express themselves but is also, perhaps not coincidentally, a fatiguing exercise, particularly for players who have to keep track of many shifting variables while also being stressed about the potential negative consequences of failure.  One or two combat encounters per game session is a good limit to impose if you're GMing for a group of beginners, and many sessions you play will feature none at all.

All singular instances of combat involving the player characters in Last Odyssey are referred to as _battles._  Each battle takes place between two opposing sides, with the player characters and their allies on one side and their enemies on the other.  Any elements of the battlefield that cannot act by themselves can still be interacted with by characters that use the Interact action.  The effects of the Interact action always trigger during the Effect Phase of the battle.  See the Actions, Turns, and Rounds section for more details.
