# Ending Combat

A battle is over when one of the two opposing sides has no active characters remaining on the field.
If the players have all been downed or killed, the party will lose something important before they come to.  For example, a group of robbers will steal all of their cr, a group of wolves might eat all of their supplies, and a monster might kidnap  them and drag them into their lair.

At the end of a battle, every downed enemy will grant the entire party Experience, shortened to XP in the rest of the rulebook, and also award them items.  By default, each downed enemy in combat awards 1 XP to each member of the party regardless of that enemy's tier.  Elite enemies are worth 5 XP, and Bosses are worth 10 XP per phase.  If the players successfully flee a battle, they do not receive any rewards.  However, if their enemies successfully flee, the players still receive the rewards for any enemies they downed before the rest fled.

Sometimes, players will encounter enemies that are of a higher or lower tier than they are.  If this is the case, the XP they earn from each enemy is modified by the difference between the PCs' tier and their enemies' tier.  If the PCs are of a higher tier than their enemies, the difference is subtracted, while if the PCs are of a lower tier the difference is added to the XP they earn for a given enemy.  The minimum amount of XP that players can earn from a given enemy is 1, and the maximum is 10.  For example, if a group of player characters of tier 3 defeats 5 elite enemies of tier 1, then the total amount of XP they earn will be 10.

In addition to earned XP, each defeated enemy drops an item from its Item Table, while Elite enemies will drop two items from their Item Table.  The Item Table is a list of three possible items that an enemy can drop, each of which is assigned a number from 1 to 3.  To determine which item an enemy drops, the GM rolls a d4.  The value they roll corresponds to the item the enemy drops.  If the GM rolls a 4, the enemy does not drop an item.  Stealing from an enemy has the opportunity to grant up to one additional item to the party per enemy.  See the Thief rules for more details.

At the end of a battle, most status effects and all buffs, debuffs, Shells, and other effects are removed from all participating characters, with the exception of Burned, Poisoned, and Frostbitten, which instead linger in the following ways:
*  Burned: Burned remains after combat, but can be healed if treated by a doctor or the Mend action.
*  Poisoned: At the end of every travel round, Poisoned characters must roll a 1d10 and add their Resistance to the result.  If the result is below a 5, they take damage equal to one tenth of their max HP, rounded down, with a minimum damage of 1.  If the result is above a 5, then they stop taking damage from Poisoned.  Poisoned can be healed if treated by a doctor or the Mend action.  If another battle starts before they are cured then they start taking damage every combat round again, and will start taking damage every travel round again after the battle is over.  The damage done by Poisoned outside of combat cannot ever cause a character to drop below 1 HP.
*  Frostbitten: Frostbitten remains after combat, but can be healed if treated by a doctor or the Mend action.
