# Followers

Player characters in need of extra hands while traveling and who have cr to spare can hire NPCs to accompany them on their journey.  Sometimes, NPCs will also travel with the players as part of a quest or when accompanying them as caravan guards.  The kinds of people willing to do this are rare, as exploration is a dangerous task.  Followers for hire, if available, will generally congregate in taverns.  An out-of-the-way tavern might have at most one or two people willing to travel with the player characters for cr, while taverns that are closer to populated areas such as towns and cities will often have a handful whose availability depends on how much work there is in the surrounding area.  On occasion, a larger city or metropolis will also be the home of an adventurer's guild, which is an organization that recruits and trains mercenaries for hire.  If the GM wants to include one of these in their game, they should populate a given adventurer's headquarters with 2d6 followers for hire.

The cost of hiring a follower is paid out per path that the follower accompanies the player characters on.  Once they reach the next settlement, the players may choose to either let that follower go or pay them to continue the journey.  If players take a follower into a dungeon or other hostile area, they will have to pay that follower's salary once per day they spend inside of it.  Whether the players can do this will depend on whether the follower is still willing to accompany them, and this is up to the GM to feel out based on the follower's personality and level of expertise.  The cost of hiring a follower in cr is determined by the services they can offer.  The base cost of hiring them is equal to 10 cr.  There are two types of services that followers can render: aid during the travel round, and aid during battle.  If followers provide both kinds of services, the total cost of hiring a follower is the sum of the costs of each of these services.

When the GM wants to create a new follower, they should follow along with the step-by-step process below.
1.  Determine the combat and travel skills the follower has.  They should not have more than one combat template applied to them at a time.
2.  Choose an elemental type for the follower's abilities, if applicable.  In addition, choose which Buff or Debuff their skills apply if they are a Support or Saboteur.  Each follower specializes in a particular elemental type.
3.  Choose the follower's equipment if appropriate.  In particular, combat followers should have a few battle items and should have a set of armor and a weapon based on their template.
4.  Fill out the follower's combat statistics if they have any combat capabilities.  If not, they will be vulnerable to death at any time due to violence.
5.  Compute the cost of hiring the follower based on their capabilities.  The total hiring cost per path or day in a dungeon is equal to the sum total of all of the individual costs associated with each of their different capabilities.
6.  Give the follower a name, a background, and decide their appearance.  In particular, the GM should focus on why they have the abilities they have.  Are they part of a magic circle?  A thieves' guild?  A wandering order of knights?
7.  Determine any other quirks of personality a follower might have.  Are they constantly cracking jokes, or are they grim and serious?  Are they cowardly, or foolhardy?  What is their attitude towards the player characters?

## Followers in Combat
Followers capable of helping during combat will have an elemental type, and will also specialize in a single Job.  Their statistics in battle are determined by their Job bonuses and what armor and weapon type they carry.  Every follower that has a combat specialty can also take the camping action associated with having their job, meaning that Strikers can use the Hunt action, Casters can use the Divine action, Healers can use the Mend action, Defenders can use the Watch action, Supports can use the Gather action, and Saboteurs can use the Scout action.  When they do so, one of the players should roll a 1d10 and compare the result to whichever of the follower's attributes corresponds to that action to see if it succeeds.  The hiring cost, abilities, and battle inventories of typical followers skilled in combat are listed below.

_Strikers_ specialize in the Striker job, and carry a Physical weapon of the GM's choice and Heavy armor.
*  Beginner: 100 cr.  Has a Body of 3, a Mind of 2, and a Spirit of 1, and can use all Striker abilities up to and including rank 3.  Their armor and weapon are Mundane Quality.  They have one Lucky or Mystical accessory and 1d4 Mundane battle items.  They also have 2 AP.
*  Intermediate: 500 cr.  Has a Body of 6, a Mind of 4, and a Spirit of 2, and can use all Striker abilities up to and including rank 6.  Their armor and weapon are Rare Quality.  They have two Lucky or Mystical accessories and 1d4 Rare battle items.  They also have 3 AP.
*  Advanced: 1000 cr.  Has a Body of 9, a Mind of 6, and a Spirit of 3, and can use all Striker abilities up to and including rank 9.  Their armor and weapon are Expert Quality.  They have three Lucky or Mystical accessories and 1d4 Expert battle items.  They also have 3 AP.

_Casters_ specialize in the Caster job, and carry a Magical weapon of the GM's choice and Light armor.
*  Beginner: 100 cr.  Has a Body of 1, a Mind of 3, and a Spirit of 1, and can use all Caster abilities up to and including rank 3.  Their armor and weapon are Mundane Quality.  They have one Lucky or Mystical accessory and 1d4 Mundane battle items.  They also have 2 AP.
*  Intermediate: 500 cr.  Has a Body of 2, a Mind of 6, and a Spirit of 4, and can use all Caster abilities up to and including rank 6.  Their armor and weapon are Rare Quality.  They have two Lucky or Mystical accessories and 1d4 Rare battle items.  They also have 3 AP.
*  Advanced: 1000 cr.  Has a Body of 3, a Mind of 9, and a Spirit of 6, and can use all Caster abilities up to and including rank 9.  Their armor and weapon are Expert Quality.  They have three Lucky or Mystical accessories and 1d4 Expert battle items.  They also have 3 AP.

_Healers_ specialize in the Healer job, and carry a Magical weapon of the GM's choice and Cloth armor.
*  Beginner: 500 cr.  Has a Body of 1, a Mind of 2, and a Spirit of 3, and can use all Healer abilities up to and including rank 3.  Their armor and weapon are Mundane Quality.  They have one Lucky or Mystical accessory and 1d4 Mundane battle items.  They also have 2 AP.
*  Intermediate: 2500 cr.  Has a Body of 2, a Mind of 4, and a Spirit of 6, and can use all Healer abilities up to and including rank 6.  Their armor and weapon are Rare Quality.  They have two Lucky or Mystical accessories and 1d4 Rare battle items.  They also have 3 AP.
*  Advanced: 5000 cr.  Has a Body of 3, a Mind of 6, and a Spirit of 9, and can use all Healer abilities up to and including rank 9.  Their armor and weapon are Expert Quality.  They have three Lucky or Mystical accessories and 1d4 Expert battle items.  They also have 3 AP.

_Defenders_ specialize in the Defender job, and carry a Balanced weapon of the GM's choice and Heavy armor.
*  Beginner: 500 cr.  Has a Body of 3, a Mind of 1, and a Spirit of 2, and can use all Defender abilities up to and including rank 3.  Their armor and weapon are Mundane Quality.  They have one Lucky or Mystical accessory and 1d4 Mundane battle items.  They also have 2 AP.
*  Intermediate: 2500 cr.  Has a Body of 6, a Mind of 2, and a Spirit of 4, and can use all Defender abilities up to and including rank 6.  Their armor and weapon are Rare Quality.  They have two Lucky or Mystical accessories and 1d4 Rare battle items.  They also have 3 AP.
*  Advanced: 5000 cr.  Has a Body of 9, a Mind of 3, and a Spirit of 6, and can use all Defender abilities up to and including rank 9.  Their armor and weapon are Expert Quality.  They have three Lucky or Mystical accessories and 1d4 Expert battle items.  They also have 3 AP.

_Supports_ specialize in the Support job, and carry a Balanced weapon of the GM's choice and Cloth armor.
*  Beginner: 250 cr.  Has a Body of 2, a Mind of 2, and a Spirit of 2, and can use all Support abilities up to and including rank 3.  Their armor and weapon are Mundane Quality.  They have one Lucky or Mystical accessory and 1d4 Mundane battle items.  They also have 2 AP.
*  Intermediate: 1250 cr.  Has a Body of 4, a Mind of 4, and a Spirit of 4, and can use all Support abilities up to and including rank 6.  Their armor and weapon are Rare Quality.  They have one Lucky or Mystical accessory and 1d4 Rare battle items.  They also have 3 AP.
*  Advanced: 2500 cr.  Has a Body of 6, a Mind of 6, and a Spirit of 6, and can use all Support abilities up to and including rank 9.  Their armor and weapon are Expert Quality.  They have one Lucky or Mystical accessory and 1d4 Expert battle items.  They also have 3 AP.

_Saboteurs_ specialize in the Saboteur job, and carry a Physical weapon of the GM's choice and Light armor.
*  Beginner: 250 cr.  Has a Body of 2, a Mind of 1, and a Spirit of 3, and can use all Saboteur abilities up to and including rank 3.  Their armor and weapon are Mundane Quality.  They have one Lucky or Mystical accessory and 1d4 Mundane battle items.  They also have 2 AP.
*  Intermediate: 1250 cr.  Has a Body of 4, a Mind of 2, and a Spirit of 6, and can use all Saboteur abilities up to and including rank 6.  Their armor and weapon are Rare Quality.  They have one Lucky or Mystical accessory and 1d4 Rare battle items.  They also have 3 AP.
*  Advanced: 2500 cr.  Has a Body of 6, a Mind of 3, and a Spirit of 9, and can use all Saboteur abilities up to and including rank 9.  Their armor and weapon are Expert Quality.  They have one Lucky or Mystical accessory and 1d4 Expert battle items.  They also have 3 AP.

The rules for True Death do not apply to ordinary NPCs.  Instead, if a follower is downed in battle or killed when the rest of the party is downed, they have a serious chance of dying.  When a follower is downed, the GM should roll a 1d10.  If the result of the roll is equal to or lower than the NPC's Body attribute, they will revive at 1 HP after the battle is over and sustain an injury.  If the result of the roll is greater than the NPC's Body, the NPC is permanently dead.  All loot and XP as a result of battle are distributed to the player characters as normal unless they decide otherwise, as it is customary that the spoils from battle be paid out by a follower's salary.  If an NPC did not participate in the combat encounter and the players are all downed, it is up to the GM whether or not they are killed, but it is very likely that they will at least flee.

## Followers During Exploration
During the travel round, Followers will have their own Supplies prepared.  Regardless of what their other capabilities are, they can always take the Cook, Shelter, Recover, and Explore actions during the camping phase.  If they have sustained an injury, they must take the Recover action and be Mended by another character in order to heal it.  Some followers will also have the ability to assist during travel.  The price of these skills is outlined below.

_Guides_ are people who can help the players navigate the local wilderness.  Hiring a guide allows player characters to reduce the navigation difficulty of a path the guide is willing and able to navigate by an amount depending on how much the navigation difficulty is reduced.  Reducing the navigation difficulty of a path by 1 costs 10 cr, reducing it by 3 costs 50 cr, and reducing it by 7 costs 100 cr.  GMs should keep in mind that guide services might not always be available, and that guides who cannot defend themselves will be very hesitant to walk into dangerous areas.  If the danger rating of a path is 2 or higher, the GM could multiply the cost of hiring a guide by 10 to reflect this.

_Pack animals_ are creatures such as horses, donkeys, and mules that can be rented from barns in town and sometimes from farmers in villages that will carry extra goods in case the players need more room.  The cost of hiring a pack animal is relative to how much it carries.  For each point of additional Carrying Capacity a pack animal can provide, renting it costs an additional 1 cr.  Pack animals need to be fed while traveling on the road.  To keep a pack animal functional, players must expend 2 additional Supplies during the camping phase to feed it.  Players can also purchase a pack animal permanently for 10 cr per amount of additional Carrying Capacity it adds to their inventory.  A typical pack animal will have a Carrying Capacity of 1d6 x 10.
