# Abilities Outside of Combat

Player characters, being endowed with the power of Mana, can use their spells to defeat enemies.  These same spells will sometimes have utility outside of combat.  When necessary, GMs should adhere to the following rules when making rulings about how they function:
*  The MP cost of an ability is the same out of combat as it is in combat.  Players can cast as many abilities at a time as they like.
*  Any ability that is usable in combat can be cast in a matter of seconds.  In cases where time is a factor, the lower the AP cost of an ability, the faster it can be cast.  If two characters use an ability at the same time the ability with the lower AP cost is activated first.  If they both use abilities with the same AP cost, the effects trigger simultaneously.
*  The physical effects of an ability are determined by its type.  Attacks will damage the environment with appropriate force and scope.  In particular, multi abilities will affect all characters and objects in the immediate vicinity (approx. 5-10 feet) of the target, while single target abilities will affect either a single character or object.

Many class and job abilities are primarily useful as tools of violence.  If a player character attacks a combat-capable NPC with an offensive ability that does damage or inflicts a status effect, this will initiate combat.  If they catch an enemy by surprise, the party will get First Strike against the enemy.  Keep in mind that not every NPC has the power of Mana or any sort of combat training.  Those who do not are generally not able to defend themselves against more than a single attack, and will either die or surrender immediately.  GMs should keep in mind that players abusing their power will have consequences later down the line.  Even if alienating a village does not lead to dangerous or even lethal blowback, the player characters gaining a reputation for being violent thugs plays directly into the hands of Antagonists, particularly Villains, and should net their Antagonists Anima when appropriate, as well as giving them additional chances to recruit the survivors and turn them into pawns.

Some class abilities have contextual usefulness out of combat, particularly those that are not directly damaging.  While the GM is encouraged to make rulings beyond the scope of what is outlined here, here are some canonical ways that character abilities can be put to use outside of combat:
*  Lay Trap can be used outside of combat to create a trap with an effective radius of approximately three feet.  When a character steps in the trap, the Ranger can attack them as though they had moved into it during battle, initiating a surprise round.
*  Steal can be used to pickpocket items outside of combat.  When a Thief uses this ability, their player rolls a 1d4.  If the result is a 4, the Thief is caught, while if the result is a 1-3 then they may steal a single item from their target's inventory.
*  Hide can be used to successfully hide in plain sight at times when it would be otherwise impossible.
*  Scan may be used by the Artificer outside of battle in order to identify the effects of items as well as the purpose of any technology that does not require Lore to understand.
*  Counterspell can be used to negate magical effects such as wards, runes, or illusions if they are present in a setting.  Keep in mind that the Sage might not possess the MP to negate every effect.
*  Prayer can be used at ritual altars to sanctify or cleanse them of dark magic, if such a thing exists in the campaign world.

Job abilities that produce elemental effects are especially useful outside of combat.  The discrete effects that an ability produces depends on its elemental type and how powerful it is in combat.  In general, abilities that do more damage will hit harder than abilities that do less.  The Elemental Bolt ability will leave a mark on a door, while the Elemental Burst ability will blow it all the way down.  Just like with class abilities, GMs are encouraged to make rulings outside of the scope of the canon ruleset, but here are some ways that elements can be used during free play:
*  Fire abilities will set flammable objects on fire.  It can also be used to boil certain liquids, melt certain solids, and activate certain objects.  The heat and size of the flame are greater for more powerful abilities.
*  Water abilities can douse flame and flood rooms, as well as dampen objects that they are used on.  The amount of water created and the force at which it comes out depend on the potency and size of the ability.
*  Earth abilities will open hairline cracks in rocks.  More powerful versions can reveal doorways and cause rockslides to occur on trails.
*  Wind abilities manipulate air currents in a localized area.  They aren't powerful enough to change the weather, but they are powerful enough to push away a patch of fog or toxic gas.
*  Thunder abilities not only produce painful shocks, but can also power electrical devices and are sometimes amplified by pools of water.
*  Ice abilities are capable of freezing water and other liquids.  At lower temperatures, shocks of cold will also freeze damp objects, which can do a great deal of internal damage.
*  Wood abilities will summon and bend plants and fungi to their will.  They can be used to manipulate roots, branches, leaves, mushrooms, and other natural features.
*  Light abilities create bursts of light when cast, temporarily banishing darkness and revealing hidden crevices.  They cannot, however, do this in a sustained way.
*  Shadow abilities work the same as light abilities except they create bursts of darkness.  Note that neither light nor shadow can fully blind someone unless the ability being used inflicts Blinded.
*  Any status affects inflicted on a character will have an equivalent effect to the one they create in battle, so Paralyzed will paralyze them, Blinded will blind them, Petrified will prevent them from moving, etc.  Status effects inflicted outside of combat, including Haste and Slow, last for 3d6 minutes per cast.  If a battle is initiated while a character has a status effect inflicted on them, it will last for the rest of the battle or until the status effect is cured.
