# Equipment

A character's base Physical and Magical Attack and Defense as well as their base Evasion and Resistance are affected by special items that they carry on their person into combat called _equipment._  By default, a character can wear three types of equipment: weapons, which give bonuses to their base Magical and Physical Attack; armor, which gives bonuses to their base Physical and Magical Defense; and accessories, which give bonuses to their base Evasion and Resistance.

The potency of a piece of equipment is determined by its Quality.  There are four levels of Quality a piece of gear can have: Mundane, Rare, Expert, and Unique.  The first three levels give flat increases to the bonuses the respective piece of armor or weaponry provides to a character's statistics.  Quality also determines the total Upgrade Value available to each weapon.  In addition to a piece of equipment's basic stats, each one also has a number of attached extra effects known as upgrades.  Each upgrade has an associated UV number.  The total sum of all of the UV numbers of the upgrades to a given weapon or armor set can never be greater than its total Upgrade Value.  Mundane equipment has a UV of 1, Rare equipment has a UV of 2, and Expert equipment has a UV of 3.  Unique weapons and armor count as having UV numbers of 3 as well, but have additional unique upgrades that distinguish them from all other pieces of equipment.

Roughly speaking, Mundane equipment is meant to be used by characters of levels 1-4, Rare equipment is meant to be used by characters of levels 4-6, Expert equipment is meant to be used by characters of levels 7-9, and Unique equipment should be acquired by characters of levels 9-10.  The exception to this rule is accessories, which do not have UV numbers but instead each possess a single upgrade that either counts as Partial or Total.  Accessories with Partial upgrades give bonuses to a character's Evasion or Resistance, while accessories with Total upgrades do not.

The Quality and number of upgrades on a piece of equipment determine the base cost to purchase them from a vendor, with the exception of Unique weapons, which are only available as rewards for adventuring.  The formulae for calculating base cost for different pieces of equipment are as follows:
*  Weapons: Mundane weapons cost 100 cr, Rare weapons cost 1,000 cr, and Expert weapons cost 10,000 cr.  Each UV 1 upgrade multiplies the cost of a weapon by 2, each UV 2 upgrade multiplies the cost of a weapon by 4, and each UV 3 upgrade multiplies the cost of a weapon by 8.
*  Armor: Mundane armor costs 500 cr, Rare armor costs 2,500 cr, and Expert armor costs 12,500 cr.  Each UV 1 upgrade multiplies the cost of an armor set by 2, each UV 2 upgrade multiplies the cost of an armor set by 4, and each UV 3 upgrade multiplies the cost of an armor set by 8.
* Accessories: The base cost of an accessory is 750 cr.  A Partial Upgrade multiplies the base cost of an accessory by 2, while a Total Upgrade multiplies it by 4.
