# Travel Items

Some items that players can purchase do not have utility in battle but instead during the travel round.  These are available at merchants in addition to combat items and equipment.  The most basic of these are _Supplies,_ which represent the various kinds of objects a player character might need while on the road.  A character may expend 1-3 units of Supplies at any time to create a new object in their inventory that is useful on the road, such as a torch, a lantern, a length of rope, or a set of climbing gear.  This piece of gear will stay in their inventory and occupy an amount of Carrying Capacity equal to the amount of Supplies expended, and will last for about as long as it would in real life.  For example, a torch might burn out after a night of use, a lantern after several nights, and climbing gear will stay in a player character's inventory until they take a bad fall or remove it.  If they do not have any Supplies, then they have run out of inventory.  If Supplies are for sale, they will cost 1 cr per unit.  Each unit of Supplies or item equivalent to a unit of Supplies takes up 1 Carrying Capacity in the party inventory.  When the party is out of Supplies, they also cannot create any more utility items in the manner described in this paragraph.  The amount of Supplies that an item requires will depend on its size and rarity:
*  Small items, such as flint, tinder, or kindling, cost 0 Supplies.
*  Hand-sized items such as kindling, lanterns, or torches cost 1 Supplies.
*  Medium-sized items or items stored in bulk such as lantern fuel or rope cost 2 Supplies.
*  Large items or items that must be carried outside of a pack such as ladders or tents cost 3 Supplies.
*  Items that are larger than a one-person canoe cannot be created with Supplies, and must be bought instead.

## Types of Travel Item
*  Fuel powers Vehicles.  Each unit of Fuel costs 10 cr, and takes up 5 Carrying Capacity in the party inventory if the party members elect to carry it on foot.
*  Poultices are items that speed up injury recovery.  Using a single Poultice will ensure that the Mend action automatically succeeds.  Using a Poultice while resting in proper accommodations will heal 1 extra injury per day.  They cost 5 cr and take up 1 Carrying Capacity.
*  Cloaks are special pieces of equipment that protect from the elements.  A player character may wear one Cloak at a time.  Cloaks do not count as accessories when worn.  The number of different varieties of weather a Cloak is proofed for and how much it costs depends on its Quality; a Mundane Cloak has one type of proofing and costs 5 cr, a Rare Cloak has two and costs 25 cr, and an Expert cloak is proofed for three and costs 75 cr.  There are four possible proofing types: Sunproof, Heatproof, Waterproof, and Coldproof.  When not being worn, Cloaks take up 1 Carrying Capacity in the party inventory.
Bags encompass backpacks, rucksacks, and any other equipment that allows characters to store items.  A character may wear only one Bag at a time.  The cost of a Bag is equal to the amount of extra Carrying Capacity it provides, which depends on the Bag's Quality.  A Mundane Bag provides 10 extra Carrying Capacity, a Rare Bag provides 25, and an Expert Bag provides 50.
*  Maps take up 1 Carrying Capacity per map in the party inventory.  A map of an area reduces the navigation difficulty of traveling the paths that it includes by an amount that depends on its Quality.  Mundane Maps cost 50 cr and reduce the navigation difficulty by 1, Rare Maps cost 250 cr and reduce the navigation difficulty by 3, and Expert Maps cost 500 cr and reduce the navigation difficulty by 7.  GMs should be aware that Maps of a particular area might not always be available, and quality Maps are likely only sold by specialized professionals who work for organizations such as trading companies or cartographer's guilds.

_Scrolls_ are single-use magic items that allow player characters to use extra actions during the camping phase that cause effects during the next day.  Each Scroll is single-use, requires one player to use their camping action to activate, and takes effect during the following travel round.  All Scrolls take up 1 Carrying Capacity in the party inventory.
*  Stormbreaker.  250 cr.  This Scroll can only be used during a Storm.  When rolling to determine the weather during the following travel round, the GM must reroll until the result is something other than a Storm.
*  Divine Weather.  100 cr.  Activating this Scroll allows you to automatically succeed at the Divine action.
*  Scrying.  500 cr.  Activating this Scroll allows you to automatically succeed at the Scout action.  It can also let you sense danger in the nearby vicinity when not traveling.
*  Clear Weather.  100 cr.  If the weather is not a Storm, the next day's weather will be Sunny.
*  Shadow.  1000 cr.  If used during travel, the following day's danger rating is reduced by 4.  If used outside of travel, this will obscure the player characters for 1d4 hours or until they do something that reveals their presence.
*  Forest Walk.  1200 cr.  This will let player characters bypass a natural hazard without making use of Supplies or a Skill *  Challenge.  It can also be used during the camping phase to reduce the navigation difficulty for the following day by 6.  Outside of travel, it can also temporarily clear paths of any naturally occurring difficult terrain, such as thick underbrush or boulders.
*  Bell.  100 cr.  Using this during travel will guarantee that an enemy encounter will happen the following day.  Using this outside of travel will alert any hostiles to the players' presence, drawing them into a fight.
*  Reveal the Path.  500 cr.  The players will always succeed on their navigation roll during the following day.
*  Mark.  5000 cr.  Creates a magical circle on the ground that players can use Recall scrolls to teleport back to.  The presence of a Mark circle is detectable by anyone with magical talent who knows what they are looking for.
*  Recall.  1000 cr.  Recalls the entire party to the presence of a Mark circle.  If it would be physically impossible to teleport there, the Recall Scroll fails and is consumed.
