# Exploration

In Last Odyssey, the wilderness is vast and dangerous.  Human settlements are connected, but oftentimes it is a struggle for ordinary people to journey between them.  In Last Odyssey, journeying between locations is handled structurally rather than merely via free play.  This is to maintain a sense of pacing, and also to create a framework for making the world feel dangerous, and therefore real.  In many ways, travel is much like combat, in that it is a structured form of play the group enters and exits at specific points during play in order to resolve a certain section of the narrative.  In this case, when the group is traveling a significant distance, that is, great enough that it would take more than six hours of walking to get there, then this counts as travel.

Each adventure the players go on is set in a finite part of a larger world.  The scope and scale of this region of the world is up to the GM, but it almost always takes the form of a set of interconnected locations, each of which will the stage for a particular act of the drama.  At the highest scale relevant for a single adventure in Last Odyssey, this is represented by a map that will be referred to in these rules as the _overworld._  In Last Odyssey, the overworld is a representation of the world as players will experience it.  It is often helpful to project it onto a geographical map of the region of the world in which the adventure takes place, but it is not strictly necessary so long as GMs have a clear sense of how players will be getting from place to place.
